*************
API Reference
*************

This page contains the API reference of the ``recordlinkage`` package. 

Standardising
=============

Cleaning and standardising your data may increase your record linkage accuracy. The ``recordlinkage`` package contains several tools for data cleaning and standardising. Some of the tools included are: phonetic encoding algorithms, gender imputation and string cleaning tools. 

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.standardise
	:members:

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.standardise.cleaning
	:members:

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.standardise.encoding
	:members:

Indexing
========

This class ``recordlinkage.Pairs`` can be used to make pairs of records, also called candidate record pairs. There are several indexing algorithms available such as blocking and sorted neighborhood indexing. 

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.indexing

.. autoclass:: Pairs
	:members:

Comparing
=========

The ``recordlinkage.Compare`` class and its methods can be used to compare records pairs. Several comparison methods are included such as string similarity measures, numerical measures and distance measures. 

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.comparing

.. autoclass:: Compare
	:members:

Classification
==============

Classification is the step in the record linkage process were record pairs are classified into matches, non=matches and possible matches. Classification algorithms can be supervised or unsupervised (rougly speaking: with or without training data). Many of the algorithms need trainings data to classify the record pairs. Trainings data is data for which is known whether it is a match or not.  

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.classifiers
	:members:
	:inherited-members:

Evaluation 
==========
Evaluation of classifications plays an important role in record linkage. Express your classification quality in terms accuracy, recall and F-score based on ``true positives``, ``false positives``, ``true negatives`` and ``false negatives``. 

.. automodule:: recordlinkage.measures
	:members:

Datasets
========

The ``recordlinkage`` package contains several open public datasets. Four datasets were generated by the developers of Febrl. In the future, we are developing tools to generate your own datasets. 

.. autofunction:: recordlinkage.datasets.load_krebsregister

.. autofunction:: recordlinkage.datasets.load_febrl1

.. autofunction:: recordlinkage.datasets.load_febrl2

.. autofunction:: recordlinkage.datasets.load_febrl3

.. autofunction:: recordlinkage.datasets.load_febrl4

